ROX-23591: ADR for improving the current manual vuln updating process (#10926)
stackrox/stackrox: scanner/decisions/0009-scannerv4-read-manual-vulnerabilities.md

# 0009 - Improve Scanner V4 manually added vulnerabilities updating process

- **Author(s):** Yi Li <yli3@redhat.com>
- **Created:** [2024-04-30]

## Context

Currently, Scanner v4 includes a feature for manually updating vulnerabilities to add and update urgent vulnerability data. 
This allows clients to access the most recent vulnerability information before it becomes officially available in some data sources. 

> However, this manual update process has a major flaw: the vulnerability data is integrated with the codebase, which means clients cannot access the updated data unless they install a patch release that includes these vulnerabilities. 

Reviewer: I meant that users/customers don't have to install a new patch release that includes the manual vulnerabilities. They need a patch release so that they have access to the latest vulnerability updates that contain the new vulnerabilities. The problem description is misleading.

> However, this manual update process has a major flaw: the vulnerability data is integrated with the codebase, which means clients cannot access the updated data unless they install a patch release that includes these vulnerabilities. 

Author: Sorry, I am not sure which part is misleading. 

> Clients cannot access the updated data unless they install a patch release that includes these vulnerabilities
Clients don't have to upgrade to the new patch release (unless they want the newly added vulnerabilities. )

> However, this manual update process has a major flaw: the vulnerability data is integrated with the codebase, which means clients cannot access the updated data unless they install a patch release that includes these vulnerabilities. 

Reviewer: > Sorry, I am not sure which part is misleading.

The part that says "a patch release that includes these vulnerabilities". The patch release itself does not contain the manual vulnerabilities. These are served in the vulnerability bundle, which is pulled from the service. But, they have do have to upgrade to a new patch release to be able to consume the new bundle that contains those vulns, because we use versions to select which bundle to pull.

> However, this manual update process has a major flaw: the vulnerability data is integrated with the codebase, which means clients cannot access the updated data unless they install a patch release that includes these vulnerabilities. 

Author: > The patch release itself does not contain the manual vulnerabilities.
But isn't `vulns.go` integrated in the code, which is part of the patch release?

> However, this manual update process has a major flaw: the vulnerability data is integrated with the codebase, which means clients cannot access the updated data unless they install a patch release that includes these vulnerabilities. 

Reviewer: Yes, but we consume the data from the vulnerability bundle, not from `vulns.go`, right?

> However, this manual update process has a major flaw: the vulnerability data is integrated with the codebase, which means clients cannot access the updated data unless they install a patch release that includes these vulnerabilities. 

Reviewer: Example: If we could merge commits to a patch release branch (we don't have that concept today) and tag it with something greater than `4.4.1` (e.g., `4.4.1.v`), it would be possible for the vulnerability generation workflow to pull that tag instead of `4.4.1`, and we would not need to force customers to upgrade because the vulnerability bundle would be updated for the `4.4.1` bundle. That is complicated and error-prone, and I prefer your proposal. But do you see how your statement is a delightfully ambiguous :sweat_smile:?

> However, this manual update process has a major flaw: the vulnerability data is integrated with the codebase, which means clients cannot access the updated data unless they install a patch release that includes these vulnerabilities. 

Author: > which means clients cannot access the updated data unless they install a patch release that fetches these vulnerabilities

Is this more reasonable?

> However, this manual update process has a major flaw: the vulnerability data is integrated with the codebase, which means clients cannot access the updated data unless they install a patch release that includes these vulnerabilities. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this manual update process has a significant flaw. The vulnerability data is integrated with the codebase, which means that updating manual vulnerabilities requires a code change. Currently, the vulnerability bundle workflow serves one vulnerability bundle per X.Y.Z stream and uses release tags to generate the bundle. Thus, changing each release branch, publishing a new patch release, and upgrading clients to start using the new bundle version would be necessary. This approach restricts clients' ability to access the new bundle until they upgrade.```

Disclaimer: I generated this with a public AI service. But it communicates the actual issue, and clarifies better what problem this ADR is trying to solve.

Therefore, it is essential to improve this process to ensure that manually inserted vulnerabilities are not dependent on any ACS release cycle. This improvement would enable all versions starting from ACS 4.4 to retrieve manually updated vulnerabilities without any issues.

## Decision

Introduce a JSON file at /scanner/updater/manual/vulns.json (The format of the json will be listed below), and update the corresponding manual vulnerability updater located in scanner/updater/manual/manual.go. 
This updater will be utilized within the existing vulnerability updating GitHub Actions workflow. 

> The new manual vulnerability updater will retrieve and parse the manually inserted data from https://github.com/stackrox/stackrox/blob/master/scanner/updater/manual/vulns.json. 

Reviewer: Do you mean pulling directly from github?

Reviewer: Github as a dependency is fine; we already depend on it to generate the bundles anyway. I  am not sure about the URL (I think you would want to use <https://raw.githubusercontent.com>.

FYI, another option might be having a step in the vuln workflow that generates "vulns.json" (as a new command in the `updater`) and stores it using `actions/upload-artifact@v4`. Then every matrix job could consume that. This would allow us to continue using Go structs to define the vulnerabilities; it would be interesting if we had to perform some complex logic to generate `vulns.json` (like iterating over data, mapping or filtering existing data, etc.). But that's not the case, AFAIK. Just keeping a JSON in the repo seems the simplest solution.

The parsed vulnerabilities will then be added into a vulns.zst file, which is generated during the updater process in the GitHub Action. 
When this vulns.zst file is imported by Scanner v4, it will also include the manually inserted vulnerability data as part of the ZST bundle.

### JSON Format
```javascript
{

>     "cves": [

Reviewer: Nitpick:

```suggestion
    "vulnerabilities": [
```

            }
        },
        ...,
        {
            "Name": "CVE-2023-28708",
            "Description":        "When using the RemoteIpFilter with requests received from a reverse proxy via HTTP that include the X-Forwarded-Proto header set to https, session cookies created by Apache Tomcat 11.0.0-M1 to 11.0.0.-M2, 10.1.0-M1 to 10.1.5, 9.0.0-M1 to 9.0.71 and 8.5.0 to 8.5.85 did not include the secure attribute. This could result in the user agent transmitting the session cookie over an insecure channel.",
            "Issued":             "2023-03-22T11:15:10Z",
            "Links":              "https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2022-29885",
            "Severity": "CVSS:3.1/AV:N/AC:L/PR:N/UI:R/S:U/C:L/I:N/A:N",
            "NormalizedSeverity": "Medium",
            "Package": {
                "Name": "org.apache.tomcat-embed-core:tomcat-embed-core",
                "RepositoryHint": "Maven",
            },
            "IntroducedInVersion": "8.5.0",
            "FixedInVersion": "8.5.86",
            "Repo": {
                "Name": "maven",
                "URI":  "https://repo1.maven.apache.org/maven2",
            }
        }
    ]
}

```

## Consequences

> Following this modification, clients will no longer need to update the ACS patch release to access manually added vulnerabilities.

Reviewer: Some others:

- Adding new vulnerabilities to the manual data source requires changes to a single branch instead of multiple patch release files.
- The vuln JSON data format must be backward compatible with all supported ACS and patch releases (as long as we continue using versioned bundles).
